This is a specification for the cycles minting canister. (#5574)
dfinity/portal: docs/references/cmcspec.mdx

import { MarkdownChipRow } from "/src/components/Chip/MarkdownChipRow";

# Cycles Minting Canister (CMC) API

<MarkdownChipRow labels={["Reference"]} />

> ## Overview

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

The Cycles Minting Canister (CMC) is a system canister on the Internet Computer responsible for converting ICP tokens into **cycles**. It supports:

> - Topping up existing canisters
> - Creating new canisters
> - Depositing minted cycles into ledger-managed accounts
> - Fetching exchange rates and subnet configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Topping up existing canisters.
- Creating new canisters.
- Depositing minted cycles into ledger-managed accounts.
- Fetching exchange rates and subnet configuration.
```

> The CMC is governed entirely by the **NNS (Network Nervous System)** and receives configuration updates through proposals.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The CMC is governed entirely by the [NNS (Network Nervous System)](https://learn.internetcomputer.org/hc/en-us/articles/33692645961236-Overview) and receives configuration updates through proposals.
```

> ## Configuration Parameters

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Configuration parameters
```

> - **Conversion Rate Source**: The ICP/XDR exchange rate is **pushed** into the CMC by a dedicated *exchange rate canister*. This data reflects live market pricing and determines the ICP→cycles conversion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Conversion rate source**: The ICP/XDR exchange rate is **pushed** into the CMC by a dedicated [exchange rate canister](/docs/references/system-canisters/xrc). This data reflects live market pricing and determines the ICP→cycles conversion.
```

> - **Governance Control**: All operations of the CMC — including upgrades, configuration, and authorized callers — are managed through NNS proposals.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Governance control**: All operations of the CMC — including upgrades, configuration, and authorized callers — are managed through NNS proposals.
```

> ## API Endpoints

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## API endpoints
```

The CMC exposes a set of core methods for converting ICP into cycles and interacting with subnet configuration. These include:

- `notify_create_canister`: Processes an ICP payment by minting cycles and using them to create a new canister, assigning control to the specified principal and applying optional settings.
- `notify_top_up`: Processes an ICP payment by minting cycles and sending them to an existing canister to increase its available balance.

> - `notify_mint_cycles`: Processes an ICP payment by minting cycles and depositing them into a cycles ledger account associated with a subaccount.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `notify_mint_cycles`: Processes an ICP payment by minting cycles and depositing them into the caller's cycles ledger account associated with a subaccount.
```

- `create_canister`: Creates a canister using cycles directly attached to the call.
- `get_icp_xdr_conversion_rate`: Returns the current ICP/XDR exchange rate with certification.

> - `get_subnet_types_to_subnets`: Lists available subnets grouped by their types.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `get_subnet_types_to_subnets`: Lists publicly available subnets grouped by their types. Only covers subnets that don't have standard settings.
```

- `get_principals_authorized_to_create_canisters_to_subnets`: Indicates which principals are permitted to create canisters on which subnets.

> - `get_default_subnets`: Returns the subnets for general-purpose canister creation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `get_default_subnets`: Returns the subnets for general-purpose public canister creation. These subnets typically have standard settings.
```

- `get_build_metadata`: Displays internal version and build information for the CMC.

> ## API Reference

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> ### `notify_create_canister`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## `notify_create_canister`
```

> Creates a new canister after verifying an ICP payment recorded in the ICP Ledger.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Creates a new canister after verifying an ICP payment has been recorded in the ICP Ledger.
```

> If the `subnet_selection field is omitted, the CMC will automatically choose a suitable subnet at random from the available options.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the `subnet_selection` field is omitted, the CMC will automatically choose a suitable subnet at random from the available options.
```

> If the `subnet_selection field is omitted, the CMC will automatically choose a suitable subnet at random from the available options.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the `subnet_selection` field and the (deprecated) `subnet_type` field are omitted, the CMC will automatically choose a suitable subnet at random from the available options.
```

The CMC expects the payment to follow a strict structure that encodes both the **intent** and the **recipient**:

- The **destination account** of the ICP transfer must be the CMC's account with a subaccount derived from the intended controller's principal.
- The **memo field** must explicitly indicate the intent to create a canister. This can be expressed as:
  - A legacy 64-bit unsigned integer memo with value `0x41455243` (ASCII `"CREA"`)
  - Or, for ICRC-1-compatible transfers (e.g., `icrc1_transfer`, `icrc2_transfer_from`), a memo blob equal to:
    ```candid
    "\43\52\45\41\00\00\00\00"
    ```
    which represents `"CREA"` padded to 8 bytes.

> - **Parameters:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Parameters
```

  ```candid
  record {
    block_index: nat64;              // The ledger block containing the ICP payment

>     controller: principal;           // The principal who will control the new canister

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    controller: principal;           // The creator of the canister. Must match caller; otherwise, Err is returned. This is also used when checking that the creator is authorized to create canisters in subnets where authorization is required. This is also used when `settings` does not specify `controllers`.
```

    settings: opt CanisterSettings;  // Optional settings like controllers, memory limits, etc.
    subnet_type: opt text;           // Deprecated: legacy subnet selection
    subnet_selection: opt SubnetSelection; // Preferred subnet selection method
  }
  ```

> - **Returns:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Returns
```

  ```candid
  variant { Ok: principal; Err: NotifyError }
  ```

> - **Notes:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Notes
```

>   - The call is idempotent with respect to `block_index`; repeating it returns the same result.

Reviewer 2: Maybe also mention that the result is only cached for a certain amount of time and that the function is only callable on ledger transactions that are recent enough

Author: I've added some info on caching of results and bounded windows for calling the functions.

>   - The controller must match the one encoded in the subaccount used for the payment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - The caller principal must match the one encoded in the subaccount used for the payment.
```
IIRC it is this way now that it is possible to specify custom canister settings. But please double-check

  - Only transactions that follow the exact memo format will be processed successfully.

>   ### `notify_top_up`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## `notify_top_up`
```

  Tops up an existing canister by minting cycles based on an ICP payment recorded in the ICP Ledger.

  The CMC expects the payment to follow a strict structure that encodes both the **intent** and the **target canister**:

  - The **destination account** of the ICP transfer must be the CMC's account with a subaccount derived from the target canister’s principal.
  - The **memo field** must explicitly indicate the intent to top up a canister. This can be expressed as:
    - A legacy 64-bit unsigned integer memo with value `0x50555054` (ASCII `"PUPT"`)
    - Or, for ICRC-1-compatible transfers (e.g., `icrc1_transfer`, `icrc2_transfer_from`), a memo blob equal to:
      ```candid
      "\50\55\50\54\00\00\00\00"
      ```
      which represents `"PUPT"` padded to 8 bytes.

  - **Parameters:**
    ```candid
    record {
      block_index: nat64;     // Block index of the ICP ledger payment
      canister_id: principal; // Canister to be topped up
    }
    ```

>   - **Returns:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Returns
```

    ```candid

>     variant { Ok: nat; Err: NotifyError } // Number of cycles minted and sent

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    variant { Ok: nat; Err: NotifyError } // Number of cycles minted and deposited
```
`sent` sounds to me like it is possible that the payment is still in flight

    ```

>   - **Notes:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Notes
```

>     - The subaccount used in the transfer must be derived from the target canister’s principal using the standard 32-byte encoding (see “Shared Logic” section).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - The subaccount used in the transfer must be derived from the target canister’s principal using the standard 32-byte encoding (see [“Shared logic”](#shared-logic) section).
```

>     - This method is idempotent by `block_index`: retrying the same request will return the same result if it already succeeded.

Reviewer 2: Same here, probably worth noting cache expiry time and that it can only be called on recent-enough blocks

    - Only transfers matching the expected structure and memo will be accepted.

>     ## `notify_mint_cycles`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## `notify_mint_cycles`
```

> Mints cycles into a **cycles ledger account** based on an ICP payment recorded in the ICP Ledger.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mints cycles into a [cycles ledger account](/docs/defi/token-ledgers/cycles-ledger) based on an ICP payment recorded in the ICP Ledger.
```

> Mints cycles into a **cycles ledger account** based on an ICP payment recorded in the ICP Ledger.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Mints cycles into the caller's **cycles ledger account** based on an ICP payment recorded in the ICP Ledger.
```

> This method is used to deposit minted cycles into a specific subaccount in the **cycles ledger**. It supports minting from both legacy and ICRC-1-style transfers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This method is used to deposit minted cycles into a specific subaccount in the [cycles ledger*](/docs/defi/token-ledgers/cycles-ledger) It supports minting from both legacy and ICRC-1-style transfers.
```

The CMC expects the payment to follow a strict structure that encodes the **intent** and **destination**:

> - The **destination account** must be the CMC’s account with the subaccount matching the `to_subaccount` parameter.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The subaccount used in the transfer must be derived from the caller principal using the standard 32-byte encoding (see “Shared Logic” section).
```

> - The **memo field** must explicitly indicate the intent to mint cycles. This can be:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The **ICP transfer's memo field** must explicitly indicate the intent to mint cycles. This can be:
```

  - For legacy `transfer` calls: a `u64` memo with value:
    ```candid
    0x544e494d  // ASCII "MINT"
    ```
  - For ICRC-1-compatible transfers (e.g., `icrc1_transfer`, `icrc2_transfer_from`): a `blob` memo equal to:
    ```candid
    "\4d\49\4e\54\00\00\00\00"
    ```
    which represents `"MINT"` padded to 8 bytes

> - **Parameters:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Parameters
```

  ```candid
  record {
    block_index: nat64;         // Block index of the ICP ledger payment
    to_subaccount: opt blob;    // 32-byte subaccount to credit in the cycles ledger

>     deposit_memo: opt blob;     // Optional application-specific memo

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    deposit_memo: opt blob;     // Optional application-specific memo that will be used in the cycles ledger's deposit transaction
```

  }
  ```

> - **Returns:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Returns
```

  ```candid
  variant {
    Ok: record {
      block_index: nat;  // Block index in the cycles ledger
      minted: nat;       // Amount of cycles minted
      balance: nat;      // Final balance of the cycles ledger account
    };
    Err: NotifyError;
  }
  ```

> - **Notes:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Notes
```

>   - The caller must be authorized to invoke this method.
>   - The subaccount in the payment must match `to_subaccount` exactly.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

>   - This method is idempotent by `block_index`.

Reviewer 2: Again mention caching and timeouts

Author: Ditto.

  - Both legacy and ICRC-1 memo formats are accepted if they correctly encode `"MINT"`.

>   ### `create_canister`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## `create_canister`
```

Creates a new canister using cycles attached directly to the call (not from an ICP ledger payment).

Unlike `notify_create_canister`, this method does not rely on an external ICP transaction. Instead, the calling canister must attach enough cycles to cover the creation cost.

> - If `subnet_selection` is omitted, the CMC will select a suitable subnet at random from the available subnets.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- If `subnet_selection` and the (deprecated) `subnet_type` are omitted, the CMC will select a suitable subnet at random from the available subnets.
```

> - If `settings` is provided, it will override default configuration for the new canister.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If `settings` is provided, it will override the default configuration for the new canister.
```

> - If no `settings` are given, the calling principal becomes the sole controller.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- If no controllers are given in `settings`, the calling principal becomes the sole controller.
```

> - **Parameters:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Parameters
```

  ```candid
  record {
    settings: opt CanisterSettings;         // Optional settings: controller(s), allocations, limits, etc.
    subnet_type: opt text;                  // (Deprecated) Legacy subnet type selection
    subnet_selection: opt SubnetSelection;  // Preferred way to select the subnet
  }
  ```

> - **Returns:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Returns
```

  ```candid
  variant { Ok: principal; Err: CreateCanisterError }
  ```

> - **Notes:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Notes
```

  - This method requires cycles to be attached to the call.
  - Returns the principal of the newly created canister.
  - The result is **not idempotent** — calling it again will consume cycles and create a different canister.

>   ## Shared Logic

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Shared logic
```

> ### Canister Settings

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### `CanisterSettings`
```

> The `CanisterSettings` record allows configuration of the canister at the time of creation or through governance. Each field is optional and will default to system-provided values if not specified.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `CanisterSettings` record is used to configure the canister at the time of creation or through governance. Each field is optional and will default to system-provided values if not specified.
```

```candid
record {
  controllers : opt vec principal;          // List of principals allowed to control the canister
  compute_allocation : opt nat;             // Percentage (0-100) of guaranteed compute capacity
  memory_allocation : opt nat;              // Memory reserved for the canister, in bytes
  freezing_threshold : opt nat;             // Number of seconds the canister can go without being topped up before being frozen
  reserved_cycles_limit : opt nat;          // Reserved minimum cycle balance for execution
  log_visibility : opt variant {
    controllers;
    public;
  };                                        // Visibility of canister logs
  wasm_memory_limit : opt nat;              // Cap on wasm memory usage, in bytes
  wasm_memory_threshold : opt nat;          // Threshold to trigger memory alerts or actions
}
```

Unspecified fields are interpreted as:

> - `controllers`: Defaults to the caller of the method
> - Other fields: Use system-wide default configuration values

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `controllers`: Defaults to the caller of the method.
- Other fields: Use system-wide default configuration values.
```

> ---

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> ### Encoding a Principal into a Subaccount

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Encoding a principal into a subaccount
```

Several CMC methods require an ICP payment to be sent to a subaccount that encodes a principal (e.g., the controller of a new canister or the canister being topped up).

To derive this subaccount, the principal is serialized and packed into a 32-byte array using the following logic:

```motoko
public func principalToSubAccount(id: Principal) : [Nat8] {
    let p = Blob.toArray(Principal.toBlob(id));
    Array.tabulate(32, func(i : Nat) : Nat8 {
        if (i >= p.size() + 1) 0
        else if (i == 0) (Nat8.fromNat(p.size()))
        else (p[i - 1])
    })
};
```

This produces a 32-byte subaccount where:

> - The first byte contains the length of the principal
> - The next bytes contain the principal's raw byte encoding
> - The remainder is zero-padded to reach 32 bytes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The first byte contains the length of the principal.
- The next bytes contain the principal's raw byte encoding.
- The remainder is zero-padded to reach 32 bytes.
```

Author: Fixed.

import { MarkdownChipRow } from "/src/components/Chip/MarkdownChipRow";

# Cycles Minting Canister (CMC) API

<MarkdownChipRow labels={["Reference"]} />

> The Cycles Minting Canister (CMC) is a system canister on the Internet Computer responsible for converting ICP tokens into **cycles**, tracking the total cycles minted, and providing configuration and exchange rate data. It supports:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Cycles Minting Canister (CMC) is a protocol canister on the Internet Computer responsible for converting ICP tokens into **cycles**, tracking the total cycles minted, and providing configuration and exchange rate data. It supports:
```

(during the last renaming of proposal topics, we were asked to call them "protocol canister"

> -   Topping up existing canisters.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
-   Topping up existing canisters with cycles.
```

-   Creating new canisters.

> -   Minting and depositing minted cycles into cycle ledger-managed accounts.

Reviewer 4: "cycle ledger-managed" has hyphenation that is confusing.

Perhaps "into accounts managed by the Cycles Ledger" would be clearer?

> -   Fetching exchange rates and subnet configuration.

Reviewer 3: here I was wondering: is this exchange rate just between cycles:ICP or more? (I thought it used to be more but now we have a separate exchange rate canister. But since I am also not sure, I wonder if others might have the same question :)

> The CMC is governed solely by the [NNS (Network Nervous System)](https://internetcomputer.org/nns/) and receives configuration updates through proposals.

Reviewer 4: "receives configuration updates" - this is true, but not exhaustive.  It also receives new functionality, bug fixes, etc.

Something more general, like "updates" or "updates to functionality and configuration" might be clearer to those who aren't already IC aficionados.

## Configuration parameters

> -   **Conversion rate source**: The ICP/XDR exchange rate is **pushed** into the CMC by a dedicated [exchange rate canister](/references/exchange-rate-canister). This data reflects live market pricing and determines the ICP→cycles conversion.

Reviewer 4: The CMC actually pulls the info from the XRC

-   **Governance control**: All operations of the CMC — including upgrades, configuration, and authorized callers — are managed through NNS proposals.
## API endpoints

The CMC exposes a set of core methods for converting ICP into cycles and interacting with subnet configuration. These include:

> -   `notify_create_canister`: Processes an ICP payment by minting cycles and using them to create a new canister, assigning control to the specified principal and applying optional settings.

Reviewer 3: does this method also burn the ICP tokens or has the burning already happened before the notification?
I thought maybe to understand the flow better, it would be useful to say in a sentence what precondition this has / what usually happened before this is executed?

Reviewer 3: Ah I now see we go into the details below, so resovling this comment!

-   `notify_mint_cycles`: Processes an ICP payment by minting cycles and depositing them into the caller's cycles ledger account associated with a subaccount.
-   `create_canister`: Creates a canister using cycles directly attached to the call.
-   `get_icp_xdr_conversion_rate`: Returns the current ICP/XDR exchange rate with certification.
-   `get_subnet_types_to_subnets`: Lists publicly available subnets grouped by their *named types* (assigned by governance).
-   `get_principals_authorized_to_create_canisters_to_subnets`: Indicates which principals are permitted by governance to create canisters on specific, non-default subnets.
-   `get_default_subnets`: Returns the subnets designated by governance for general-purpose public canister creation.
-   `total_cycles_minted`: Returns the total number of cycles ever minted by the CMC.
-   `get_build_metadata`: Displays internal version and build information for the CMC.
-   `http_request`: Provides canister metrics via a standard HTTP interface (useful for monitoring).

## `notify_create_canister`

> Uses tokens from an ICP transfer to **mint cycles**, which are then used to **create a new canister**. The CMC first verifies that the transfer has been recorded in the ICP ledger and that it matches the expected structure. If the `subnet_selection` field is omitted, the CMC selects a suitable subnet at random from the list of subnets available to the `controller` (either default or authorized).

Reviewer 3: This might also make the first point below clearer

> Uses tokens from an ICP transfer to **mint cycles**, which are then used to **create a new canister**. The CMC first verifies that the transfer has been recorded in the ICP ledger and that it matches the expected structure. If the `subnet_selection` field is omitted, the CMC selects a suitable subnet at random from the list of subnets available to the `controller` (either default or authorized).

Author: Isn't this the change that Daniel implemented to deal with a security issue? I thought only the nns-dapp is allowed to break this rule.

The CMC expects the payment to follow a strict structure that encodes both the **intent** and the **recipient**:

-   The **destination account** of the ICP transfer must be the CMC's account with a **subaccount derived from the intended controller's principal** (see the section on [Encoding a principal into a subaccount](#encoding-a-principal-into-a-subaccount)).
-   The **principal encoded in the subaccount is the intended controller** of the created canister.
-   Only that principal is authorized to call `notify_create_canister` and can set **arbitrary canister settings**, including additional controllers.

> -   **Exception**: The [NNS dapp](https://nns.ic0.app/) is permitted to call `notify_create_canister` on behalf of users and acts as a proxy in that case.

Reviewer 3: in this case, how is the controller determined?

Author: I only remember the old flow where the controller is the whatever is encoded in the subaccount. I don't think we've changed that.

-   The **memo field** must explicitly indicate the intent to create a canister. This can be expressed as:
    -   A legacy 64-bit unsigned integer memo with value (in decimal):
        ```

>         1095062083

Reviewer 4: How was this derived?  It would be good to have an explanation, so it can be checked.  I believe it should work out to "CREA" but in little endian if I remember correctly.

        ```

#### Parameters

```candid
record {
  block_index: nat64;              // The ledger block containing the ICP payment
  controller: principal;           // The creator of the canister. Must match caller; otherwise, Err is returned (unless caller is NNS Dapp). This is also used when checking that the creator is authorized to create canisters in subnets where authorization is required. This is also used when `settings` does not specify `controllers`.
  settings: opt CanisterSettings;  // Optional settings like controllers, memory limits, etc.
  subnet_type: opt text;           // Deprecated: legacy subnet selection
  subnet_selection: opt SubnetSelection; // Preferred subnet selection method
}
```

#### Returns

```candid
variant { Ok: principal; Err: NotifyError }
```

-   **Ok**: The principal of the newly created canister.
-   **Err**: Indicates why the request was rejected (e.g., incorrect memo, controller mismatch, payment already processed, etc.).
    For information about retry semantics, error handling, and caching behavior, see [Notify Methods – Shared Behavior](#notify-methods--shared-behavior-retry-error-handling-and-caching).

## `notify_top_up`

> Tops up an existing canister by minting cycles based on an ICP payment recorded in the ICP Ledger.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Tops up an existing canister with additional cycles by minting cycles based on an ICP payment recorded in the ICP Ledger.
```
(just to define a bit more what we mean by "topup"

The CMC expects the payment to follow a strict structure that encodes both the **intent** and the **target canister**:

-   The **destination account** of the ICP transfer must be the CMC's account with a subaccount derived from the target canister’s principal (see the section on [Encoding a principal into a subaccount](#encoding-a-principal-into-a-subaccount)).
-   The **memo field** must explicitly indicate the intent to top up a canister. This can be expressed as:
    -   A legacy 64-bit unsigned integer memo with value (in decimal)
        ```
        1347768404
        ```
    -   Or, for ICRC-1-compatible transfers (e.g., `icrc1_transfer`, `icrc2_transfer_from`), a memo blob equal to:
        ```

>         "\50\55\50\54\00\00\00\00" // ASCII "TUPT" + 4 zero bytes

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
        "\50\55\50\54\00\00\00\00" // ASCII "TPUP" + 4 zero bytes
```

Reviewer 4: Hex may also need to be updated but it actually looks right...

`pub const MEMO_TOP_UP_CANISTER: Memo = Memo(0x50555054); // == 'TPUP'`

  canister_id: principal; // Canister to be topped up
}
```

#### Returns

```candid
variant { Ok: nat; Err: NotifyError }
```

-   **Ok**: Number of cycles minted and deposited into the specified canister.
-   **Err**: Indicates why the top-up failed (e.g., incorrect memo, controller mismatch, payment already processed, etc.).
    For information about retry semantics, error handling, and caching behavior, see [Notify Methods – Shared Behavior](#notify-methods--shared-behavior-retry-error-handling-and-caching).

#### Notes

-   The subaccount used in the transfer must be derived from the target canister’s principal using the standard 32-byte encoding (see [“Shared logic”](#shared-logic) section).

## `notify_mint_cycles`

Mints cycles into a [cycles ledger account](/docs/concepts/tokens/cycles/cycles-ledger) based on an ICP payment recorded in the ICP Ledger.

This method is used to deposit minted cycles into a specific subaccount in the [cycles ledger.](/docs/concepts/tokens/cycles/cycles-ledger) It supports minting from both legacy and ICRC-1-style transfers.

The CMC expects the payment to follow a strict structure that encodes the **intent** and **destination**:

> -   The subaccount used in the transfer must be derived from the caller principal using the standard 32-byte encoding (see “Shared Logic” section).

Reviewer 3: do we want to add a link to the section here as in other places?

```candid
record {
  block_index: nat64;       // Block index of the ICP ledger payment
  to_subaccount: opt blob;   // 32-byte subaccount to credit in the cycles ledger
  deposit_memo: opt blob;    // Optional application-specific memo that will be used in the cycles ledger's deposit transaction
}
```

#### Returns

```candid
variant {
  Ok: record {
    block_index: nat;
    minted: nat;
    balance: nat;
  };
  Err: NotifyError;
}
```

-   **Ok**: A record that includes:
    -   `block_index`: The cycles ledger block index of the minting transaction
    -   `minted`: The amount of cycles created from the ICP payment
    -   `balance`: The new balance of the target cycles ledger subaccount
-   **Err**: Indicates why the minting failed (e.g., incorrect memo, controller mismatch, payment already processed, etc.).
    For information about retry semantics, error handling, and caching behavior, see [Notify Methods – Shared Behavior](#notify-methods--shared-behavior-retry-error-handling-and-caching).

## Notify Methods – Shared Behavior (Retry, Error Handling, and Caching)

All `notify_*` methods (such as `notify_create_canister` and `notify_top_up`) follow the same core semantics:

> -   Before processing any specific operation (like create or top-up), the CMC checks the memo of the incoming ICP transfer identified by `block_index`. If the memo (either the legacy `u64` memo or the ICRC-1 `blob` memo interpreted as a little-endian `u64`) does **not** match one of the recognized operation memos (`1095062083` for create, `1347768404` for top-up, `1414416717` for mint), the CMC attempts to automatically refund the ICP amount (minus the standard ledger transfer fee) back to the sender's account (`from` account in the transfer). If the refund succeeds or fails terminally, the call will return a `NotifyError::Refunded` or `NotifyError::InvalidTransaction` respectively. If the refund attempt fails transiently (e.g., ledger unavailable), the status is cleared, allowing a retry.

Reviewer 3: the retry (last line here) has then to be triggered manually? 
so the CMC just tries ones can then stops trying?

-   If a concurrent `notify_*` call is already processing for the same transfer, the new call returns an error indicating that the operation is in progress (`NotifyError::Processing`).
-   If a previous `notify_*` call has already successfully processed a transfer at the same block height, the new call returns the same cached result (Ok or a terminal Err like `InvalidTransaction` or `Refunded`).
-   To support safe retries, the result of a successful call or a terminal error is **cached** for a bounded (but generous) number of blocks (`MAX_NOTIFY_HISTORY`). Calls referring to blocks older than the cache window will fail with `NotifyError::TransactionTooOld`.

> These semantics ensure that all `notify_*` methods are idempotent. Clients can safely retry using the original parameters (memo, block height, destination account).

Reviewer 4: nit: idempotent within the supported block window.

### Error Handling and Refunds (`NotifyError`)

Calls to `notify_*` methods return a `variant { Ok: ...; Err: NotifyError }`. The `NotifyError` type indicates why an operation failed:

```candid
type NotifyError = variant {
  Refunded: record { reason : text; block_index : opt nat64 }; // Request was invalid; ICP (minus fees) was refunded (or attempted). `block_index` is the refund transaction index, if successful.
  InvalidTransaction: text; // Transaction details (e.g., destination, memo) don't match the request, or it was already processed for a different operation.

>   Processing: null; // The specified block_index is currently being processed by another call. Retry shortly.

Reviewer 3: "Retry shortly" is what we ask the caller who sees this error to do, right?
I was first not sure if this indicates "the canister will retry shortly", so maybe we can make this more precise?

  TransactionTooOld: nat64; // The block_index is older than the CMC's cached history (value returned is the minimum valid block_index). Cannot be retried.
  Other: record { error_code: nat64; description: text; }; // A miscellaneous error occurred.
};
```

**Key Points:**

> -   **`Refunded`**: This occurs if the initial ICP transfer had an unrecognized memo (automatic refund), or if the canister creation/top-up/minting failed *after* the ICP transfer was validated (e.g., subnet unavailable, deposit cycles failed).

Reviewer 3: what do these points here refer to? are all of them error reasons? If so, should there maybe be 1 sentence explaining this?

        -   Create Canister Refund Fee: `10_000` e8s (`CREATE_CANISTER_REFUND_FEE`)
        -   Top Up Refund Fee: `10_000` e8s (`TOP_UP_CANISTER_REFUND_FEE`)
        -   Mint Cycles Refund Fee: `10_000` e8s (`MINT_CYCLES_REFUND_FEE`)
    -   The `reason` field provides details. The `block_index` indicates the ledger block of the successful refund transfer, if applicable.
-   **`InvalidTransaction`**: The provided `block_index` might correspond to a transaction that doesn't match the request (e.g., wrong memo for the operation, wrong destination subaccount) or was already processed under a *different* `notify_*` call.
-   **`Processing`**: Indicates contention. Simply retrying the *exact same call* after a short delay is appropriate.
-   **`TransactionTooOld`**: The CMC only keeps a history of recent notifications (`MAX_NOTIFY_HISTORY` entries, currently 1,000,000). Older transactions cannot be processed. The returned value is the oldest `block_index` the CMC *might* still know about.

> -   **`Other`**: Catches various issues, such as failure to fetch the block from the ledger (`FailedToFetchBlock` error code `1`), internal CMC errors, or authorization issues (`Unauthorized` error code `3` if `notify_create_canister` caller != creator and is not NNS Dapp), bad subnet selection (`BadSubnetSelection` error code `4`).

Reviewer 3: is internal CMC errror code '2' ? Just noticed that we don't give the code for this case and that we left out the nubmer 2 :D

-   If `subnet_selection` and the (deprecated) `subnet_type` are omitted, the CMC will select a suitable subnet at random from the available subnets (either default subnets or those specifically authorized for the caller principal).
-   If `settings` is provided, it will override the default configuration for the new canister.
-   If no controllers are given in `settings`, the calling principal becomes the sole controller.

#### Parameters

```candid
record {
  settings: opt CanisterSettings;       // Optional settings: controller(s), allocations, limits, etc.
  subnet_type: opt text;                // (Deprecated) Legacy subnet type selection
  subnet_selection: opt SubnetSelection; // Preferred way to select the subnet
}
```

#### Returns

```candid
variant { Ok: principal; Err: CreateCanisterError }
```

-   **Ok**: The principal ID of the newly created canister.
-   **Err**: A `CreateCanisterError` indicating why creation failed. This is currently always a `Refunded` variant:
    ```candid
    type CreateCanisterError = variant {
      Refunded : record { refund_amount: nat; create_error: text; };
    };
    ```

>     -   `create_error`: Text description of the failure (e.g., "Insufficient cycles attached", "No subnets in which to create a canister", or errors from the IC management canister).

Reviewer 3: do we still call this "IC management canister" even though we should use "ICP" instead of "IC" in most places?

-   `hash_tree`: The CBOR-encoded hash tree proving the inclusion of the `data` in the certificate.

#### Notes

This method can be called as a query. Clients should verify the certificate and hash_tree against the root subnet's public key to ensure authenticity.

## Subnet Configuration (Governance Methods)

The following methods are used by the NNS Governance canister to configure how canisters are created across different subnets. Developers typically do not call these directly but may query the results using methods like `get_default_subnets`, `get_principals_authorized_to_create_canisters_to_subnets`, and `get_subnet_types_to_subnets`.

### `set_authorized_subnetwork_list` (Governance only)

Configures which principals are authorized to create canisters on specific lists of subnets.

-   **Caller**: Must be the NNS Governance canister.
-   **Purpose**:
    -   Sets the **default list** of subnets where *any* principal can create canisters (when `who` parameter is `null`).
    -   Sets a specific list of subnets where a designated `who` principal is authorized to create canisters. If the `subnets` list is empty, the authorization for `who` is removed.

> -   **Preconditions**: Subnets added to the default or authorized lists cannot already be assigned to a named subnet type (see `update_subnet_type`).

Reviewer 3: is a "named subnet" the same as a "subnet type"? or do we mean sth else where?

Author: I guess subnet type is accurate

*(Args: `variant { Add: SubnetListWithType; Remove: SubnetListWithType; }` where `SubnetListWithType = record { subnets: vec principal; subnet_type: text; }`, Returns: `variant { Ok: (); Err: text }`)*

## `get_subnet_types_to_subnets`

Returns a mapping from named subnet types (e.g., `"Fiduciary"`) assigned by NNS Governance to the list of subnet principals belonging to that type. Subnets listed here are typically reserved for specific purposes and are separate from the default and authorized lists.

#### Parameters

```candid
record {}
```

#### Returns

```candid
// Current type: SubnetTypesToSubnetsResponse = record { data: vec record { text; vec principal } }
// Draft type shown for simplicity:
record {
  subnets: vec record {
    subnet_type: text;
    subnet_ids: vec principal;
  };
}
```

-   Each entry in `subnets` represents a mapping from a subnet type to the list of subnets that belong to that type.

#### Notes

This information can be used by dapps to select appropriate subnets for canister creation when a specific type is desired via `SubnetSelection::Filter`.

## `get_principals_authorized_to_create_canisters_to_subnets`

> Lists principals specifically authorized by NNS Governance to create canisters on non-default subnets, and the corresponding list of subnet principals they are permitted to use.

Reviewer 3: I wonder if the relationship between default / non-default subnets (with special permissions) and the "named types" (where any principal can deploy AFAIK) is clear. If we want to be extra clear, maybe we could have a small section introducing these different concepts?

```

#### Returns

```candid
// Current type: AuthorizedSubnetsResponse = record { data: vec record { principal; vec principal } }
// Draft type shown for simplicity:
record {
  mappings: vec record {
    principal: principal;
    subnet_ids: vec principal;
  };
}
```

-   Each entry represents a principal and the list of subnet IDs on which they are allowed to create canisters.

#### Notes

This is typically governed by proposals on the NNS. Only some principals are explicitly authorized for specific subnets beyond the default list.

## `get_default_subnets`

Returns the list of subnet principals designated by NNS Governance as default targets for canister creation. Any principal can typically create canisters on these subnets without specific authorization.

#### Parameters

```candid
record {}
```

#### Returns

```candid
// Current type: vec principal
// Draft type shown for simplicity:
record {
  subnets: vec principal;
}
```

-   `subnets`: The default subnets that a user may be assigned when no specific subnet is requested during canister creation.

#### Notes

These are usually `"application"` type subnets and serve as a fallback option.

## `total_cycles_minted`

> Returns the total number of cycles ever minted by the CMC since its genesis. This provides a measure of the overall cycles created via the CMC mechanism.

Author: ```suggestion
Returns the total number of cycles ever minted by the CMC since its genesis.
```

  body: blob;
}
```

#### Returns

```candid
record {
  status_code: nat16;
  headers: vec record { name: text; value: text };
  body: blob; // Prometheus metrics data
  // streaming_strategy : opt ... // Optional streaming fields omitted
}
```

#### Notes

-   Call with method "GET" and URL "/metrics".
-   Provides metrics like `cmc_cycles_minted_total`, `cmc_icp_xdr_conversion_rate`, `cmc_limiter_cycles`, `cmc_cycles_limit`, etc. Useful for monitoring CMC activity and capacity. Requires standard HTTP request structure.

## Shared logic

### `CanisterSettings`

The `CanisterSettings` record is used to configure the canister at the time of creation or through governance. Each field is optional and will default to system-provided values if not specified.

```candid
record {
  controllers : opt vec principal;         // List of principals allowed to control the canister
  compute_allocation : opt nat;            // Percentage (0-100) of guaranteed compute capacity
  memory_allocation : opt nat;             // Memory reserved for the canister, in bytes
  freezing_threshold : opt nat;            // Number of seconds the canister can go without being topped up before being frozen

>   // reserved_cycles_limit : opt nat;      // (Note: This field might not be directly settable via CMC)

Reviewer 3: I don't understand the note here. 
All of this cannot be set by CMC but needs to be set by its controller (NNS root), right?

  log_visibility : opt variant { controllers; public; }; // Visibility of canister logs
  wasm_memory_limit : opt nat;             // Cap on wasm memory usage, in bytes
}
```

Unspecified fields are interpreted as:

-   `controllers`: Defaults to the caller of the method (`notify_create_canister`'s controller or `create_canister`'s caller).

> -   Other fields: Use system-wide default configuration values set by the IC replica.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
-   Other fields: Use system-wide default configuration values set by the ICP replica.
```(not sure)
